
## The UPDATE Statement

The `UPDATE` statement is used to modify the value(s) in existing records in a table.

### Example

Set the color of the Volvo to 'red':

```sql
UPDATE cars  
SET color = 'red'  
WHERE brand = 'Volvo';
```

Which means that `1` row was affected by the `UPDATE` statement.

**Note:** Be careful with the `WHERE` clause, in the example above ALL rows where brand = 'Volvo' gets updated.

### Example

Without the `WHERE` clause, ALL records will be updated:

```sql
UPDATE cars  
SET color = 'red';
```
## Update Multiple Columns

To update more than one column, separate the name/value pairs with a comma `,`:

```sql
UPDATE cars  
SET color = 'white', year = 1970  
WHERE brand = 'Toyota';
```


---
## The DELETE Statement

The `DELETE` statement is used to delete existing records in a table.

**Note:** Be careful when deleting records in a table! Notice the `WHERE` clause in the `DELETE` statement. The `WHERE` clause specifies which record(s) should be deleted.

If you omit the `WHERE` clause,  
**all records in the table will be deleted**!.

To delete the record(s) where brand is 'Volvo', use this statement:

### Example

Delete all records where brand is 'Volvo':

```sql
DELETE FROM cars  
WHERE brand = 'Volvo';
```

## Delete All Records

It is possible to delete all rows in a table without deleting the table. This means that the table structure, attributes, and indexes will be intact.

The following SQL statement deletes all rows in the `cars` table, without deleting the table:

### Example

Delete all records in the `cars` table:

```sql
DELETE FROM cars;
```
## TRUNCATE TABLE

Because we omit the `WHERE` clause in the `DELETE` statement above, all records will be deleted from the cars table.

The same would have been achieved by using the `TRUNCATE TABLE` statement:

### Example

Delete all records in the `cars` table:

```sql
TRUNCATE TABLE cars;
```

## The DROP TABLE Statement

The `DROP TABLE` statement is used to drop an existing table in a database.

**Note:** Be careful before dropping a table. Deleting a table will result in loss of all information stored in the table!

The following SQL statement drops the existing table `cars`:

### Example

Delete the `cars` table:

```sql
DROP TABLE cars;
```

## Display Table

To check the result we can display the table with this SQL statement:

### Example

```sql
SELECT * FROM cars;
```

