
The programming paradigms are the styles/methodologies of writing the code in a program. Various programming styles have been adopted depending upon the requirements. There have been different styles used since the beginning of programming languages, and we will explore a few well-known ways in this article.

1. **Monolithic Programming.**
2. **Modular/ Procedural.**
3. **Object-Oriented.**

##### **Monolithic Programming:**

In monolithic programming, the entire program code is present in a single block without any division of code into functions. Monolithic programming is defined as writing a whole program in a single function that is in the main function. A single individual can write and maintain this style of programming, much as a single artist can produce a painting. For example: Here in this example, we have written a sample code in Monolithic Programming style.

```C#
static void Main(string[] args)
{
    int i, n;
    bool IsPrime = true;
    Console.WriteLine("Enter a Positive Integer");
    n = Convert.ToInt32(Console.ReadLine());

    //0 and 1 are not prime numbers
    if(n == 0 || n==1)
    {
        IsPrime = false;
    }
    else
    {
        for(i=2; i <= n/2; ++i)
        {
            if(n % i == 0)
            {
                IsPrime = false;
                break;
            }
        }
    }

    if(IsPrime)
    {
        Console.WriteLine(n + " is a Prime Number");
    }
    else
    {
        Console.WriteLine(n + " is not a Prime Number");
    }
}

```

##### **Modular/ Procedural Programming:**

In this programming style, the code is written in separate blocks and not in a single block that can be used in the program whenever require without writing the entire piece of code again. Here, a particular set of code is present in the form of functions or modules that can be used wherever required. Therefore, it is called modular programming. The most popular programming language in modular programming is the C language.

Modular programming refers to the division of a program into a number of functional pieces. If the main program is separated into sub-programs, we may code each sub-module separately and then integrate them into a single unit. Individual modules of this type are referred to as functions. For example: Here in this example, we have written a sample code in Modular/ Procedural style.


```C#
static void Main(string[] args)
{
    int n;
    Console.WriteLine("Enter a Positive Integer");
    n = Convert.ToInt32(Console.ReadLine());
    
    bool isPrime = IsPrime(n);

    if (isPrime)
    {
        Console.WriteLine(n + " is a Prime Number");
    }
    else
    {
        Console.WriteLine(n + " is not a Prime Number");
    }
}

private static bool IsPrime(int n)
{
    bool IsPrime = true;
    //0 and 1 are not prime numbers
    if (n == 0 || n == 1)
    {
        IsPrime = false;
    }
    else
    {
        for (int i = 2; i <= n / 2; ++i)
        {
            if (n % i == 0)
            {
                IsPrime = false;
                break;
            }
        }
    }
    return IsPrime;
}

```


##### **Object-Oriented Programming:**

In OOPs, the code is written in the form of classes that contains different data members and member functions, the data, and their associated functions are grouped together. The objects can also be created by using class type.

We know in the modular approach we have data and functions as separate entities i.e. Functions can use the data from outside. But in an Object-Oriented style, we can have data and function together as one entity. This entity is called Class and we have created multiple instances of a class called Objects. For example: Here in this example, we have written a sample code in Object-Oriented style**.**

```C#
//Car is a class
class Car
{
    string Name;
    int Speed;
    int Weight;

    void Break()
    {
    }

    void SlowDown()
    {
    }

    static void Main(string[] args)
    {
        //ford is an object
        Car ford = new Car();
    }
}

```


