
##### **1xx (Informational) Status Codes:**
- **100 Continue:** This informs the client that the initial part of the request has been received and that the client should continue sending the rest of the request.
- **101 Switching Protocols:** Indicates that the server is switching to a different protocol as requested by the client.
##### **2xx (Successful) Status Codes:**

- **200 OK:** The HTTP 200 OK success status response code indicates that the request has succeeded. It is often used for GET and POST requests that are processed successfully.
- **201 Created:** The request has succeeded, and a new resource has been created as a result. This is typically used in response to a POST request.
- **202 Accepted:** The server has received the request and will process it, but the processing may not be completed immediately.
- **204 No Content:** The server successfully processed the request but is not returning any content. This is often used for DELETE requests.

##### **3xx (Redirection) Status Codes:**

- **301 Moved Permanently:** This response status code tells the client that the resource has been moved permanently to a new URL and should use the new URL in future requests.
- **302 Found:** This response status code indicates that the resource is temporarily located at a different URL. The client should use this temporary URL for this request. As the redirection might be altered occasionally, the client should continue using the original URI for future requests.
- **304 Not Modified:** This response status code informs the client that the resource has not changed since the last request so that the client can use its cached version.
##### **4xx (Client Error) Status Codes:**
- **400 Bad Request:** The server cannot process the request due to a client error (e.g., malformed request syntax).
- **401 Unauthorized:** Authentication is required and has failed or has not been provided.
- **403 Forbidden:** The server understands the request but refuses to authorize it due to lack of permission.
- **404 Not Found:** The server can not find the requested resource. In the browser, this means the URL is not recognized. In an API, this can also mean that the endpoint is valid, but the resource itself does not exist.
- **405 Method Not Allowed:** This indicates that the server knows the request method but is not supported by the target resource. For example, we have one method, which is a POST method, in the server, and we are trying to access that method from the client using GET Verb; then, in that case, we will get a 405-status code.

##### **5xx (Server Error) Status Codes:**

- **500 Internal Server Error:** The server encountered an unexpected condition that prevented it from fulfilling the request.
- **501 Not Implemented:** The server either does not recognize the request method or is unable to fulfill the request.
- **502 Bad Gateway:** The server received an invalid response from the upstream server it accessed while trying to fulfill the request.
- **503 Service Unavailable:** The server is not ready to handle the request. Common causes include a server that is down for maintenance or overloaded.
- **504 Gateway Timeout:** This status code indicates that the server, while acting as a gateway or proxy, did not get a response from the upstream server in time to complete the request.






BadRequest();
Ok()
NotFound();


##### **When Should We Return 200 OK HTTP Status Code in ASP.NET Core Web API?**

- **GET Requests:** When handling GET requests that fetch data successfully, you should return a 200 OK status. The response typically includes the resource data requested by the client.
- **POST Requests with Resource Creation:** If a POST request creates a resource and you choose to return it in the response, 200 OK can be used, although 201 Created is more appropriate if you also provide a URI to the created resource in the response header. Use 200 OK if you are returning the newly created entity without a new URI.
- **PUT or PATCH Requests:** For update operations using PUT or PATCH, if the operation is successful and you wish to send the updated resource back to the client, 200 OK is appropriate. The response should include the updated data.
- **DELETE Requests:** When a DELETE request successfully removes a resource, you can use 200 OK if you want to return some information about the deleted resource or a confirmation message. However, 204 No Content is often used when no content is returned.
- **Complex Operations:** For actions that involve complex operations or business logic where the result isn’t necessarily the creation, update, or deletion of a resource, you might use 200 OK to indicate successful processing along with relevant result data.

It’s important to note that while 200 OK is suitable for many successful operations, other success status codes can provide more specific information about the request’s outcome:

- **201 Created:** Specifically, for when a new resource has been successfully created.
- **202 Accepted:** Indicates that the request has been accepted for processing but has not been completed.
- **204 No Content:** Indicates that the server successfully processed the request but is not returning any content. Often used for DELETE operations or when PUT operations do not return any content.



## **201 HTTP Status Code in ASP.NET Core Web API**


return CreatedAtRoute("GetGetEmployeeRoute", new { id = employee.Id }, employee);
return CreatedAtAction("GetEmployee", new { id = employee.Id }, null);
##### **Created():**

##### **Created(string? uri, [ActionResultObjectValue] object? value):**

var locationUri = Url.Action("GetEmployee", new { id = employee.Id });

// Return 201 Created response with the URI and the employee object

return Created(locationUri, employee);

// Return 201 Created response with the URI and the employee object

return Created(new Uri(locationUri), employee);

##### **202 HTTP Status Code**

return AcceptedAtAction("GetStatus", new { JobId = processingJobId }, null);



## **204 HTTP Status Code in ASP.NET Core Web API**

##### **204 HTTP Status Code**

return StatusCode(StatusCodes.Status204NoContent);

Response.StatusCode = 302; // HTTP 302 Redirect Temporarily
Response.Headers.Location = newUrl;

